HDDS-13087. [snapshot] Expand user doc (#8496)
apache/ozone: hadoop-hdds/docs/content/feature/Snapshot.md

Ozone also provides a SnapshotDiff feature. When a user issues a SnapshotDiff between two snapshots, the OM efficiently computes all the differences (added, deleted, modified, or renamed keys) between the two snapshots and returns a paginated list of changes. Snapshot diff results are cached to speed up subsequent requests for the same snapshot pair.

## **System Architecture Deep Dive**

> Internally, Ozone implements snapshots by **versioning the OM metadata for each bucket** snapshot. The OM maintains a snapshot metadata table that records the state of the bucket’s key directory tree at the moment of snapshot creation. No data is physically copied at snapshot creation – the operation simply marks a consistent snapshot of the OM’s RocksDB state (hence snapshots are created instantaneously). Under the hood, Ozone relies on RocksDB’s abilities (like snapshot and column family cloning) to preserve point-in-time views of the metadata. Each snapshot is identified by a unique ID and name, and each key entry in the OM DB carries information about which snapshots (if any) it belongs to. This approach ensures that **common data is not duplicated** across snapshots: if a key has not changed between two snapshots, both snapshots reference the same underlying data blocks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Internally, Ozone implements snapshots by **versioning the OM metadata for each bucket** snapshot. The OM maintains a snapshot metadata table that records the state of the bucket’s key directory tree at the moment of snapshot creation. No data is physically copied at snapshot creation – the operation simply marks a consistent snapshot of the OM’s RocksDB state (hence snapshots are created instantaneously). Under the hood, Ozone relies on RocksDB’s abilities (like checkpoint) to preserve point-in-time views of the metadata. Each snapshot is identified by a unique ID and name, and each key entry in the OM DB carries information about which snapshots (if any) it belongs to. This approach ensures that **common data is not duplicated** across snapshots: if a key has not changed between two snapshots, both snapshots reference the same underlying data blocks.
```

* **Implementation:** Internally, Ozone snapshots leverage the OM’s key-value store and share data blocks between snapshots, which is analogous to HDFS’s copy-on-write approach for metadata. One notable difference is that Ozone being object-store, does not have an equivalent of HDFS block tracking for snapshots at the DataNode level – all the intelligence is in the OM. HDFS NameNode also handles snapshot metadata, but Ozone’s design (with its RocksDB metadata store) means snapshot creation is O(1) and implemented via metadata pointers rather than duplication. Both systems do not copy actual file data on snapshot – they rely on not deleting underlying blocks.

In summary, Ozone snapshots give similar benefits for Ozone buckets as HDFS snapshots do for directories, but Ozone’s approach is bucket-scoped and oriented toward object store semantics. If coming from HDFS, just note that you cannot snapshot volumes or the entire namespace at once (you snapshot each bucket individually), and you cannot snapshot sub-folders of a bucket.

## **Known Issues and Limitations**

While Apache Ozone’s snapshot feature is powerful, there are a few current limitations and caveats to be aware of:

> * **S3 Interface Support:** Snapshot operations are *not* supported via the S3 API (`s3://` or `s3a://` access). Ozone’s S3 Gateway does not expose snapshot functionality, since Amazon S3 has no direct concept of snapshots. This means you cannot create or list snapshots through the S3 Gateway or the `s3a` Hadoop FileSystem connector. Snapshots must be managed via the Ozone RPC interface (ozone shell, ozone fs, or Ozone Client API). However, snapshotted data can be read via the S3 Gateway using the special `.snapshot` key prefix. For example, a key `key1` in the snapshot `snap1` can be read using the path `.snapshot/snap1/key1`.

Reviewer: We support snapshots in S3 buckets via creating linked buckets on s3v volume

Author: Sure but S3 API does not have the notion of snapshots

* **Reserved Namespace Name `.snapshot`:** The name `.snapshot` is reserved by Ozone. Users cannot create keys or directories with the exact name `.snapshot` at the root of a bucket (and similarly, `.snapshot` cannot be used as a volume or bucket name). This is because `.snapshot` is used as the special entry to access snapshots. For example, if a user tries to create a directory literally named `.snapshot` in a bucket, the system will prevent it or treat it as the snapshot namespace. This is analogous to HDFS where `.snapshot` is a reserved directory name in snapshottable directories. The reservation is case-sensitive (only `.snapshot` in all lowercase is reserved). As a best practice, avoid naming any key or folder in Ozone starting with “.snapshot” to prevent any ambiguity.

> * **Snapshot Performance and Scale:** Creating snapshots is instantaneous and cheap in Ozone; however, maintaining a very large number of snapshots (thousands per bucket) can increase the size of OM metadata and slow down operations like listing snapshots or performing snapshot diff (especially if many snapshots are being diffed). Recent improvements have raised the supported snapshot limit (default max 10k per OM as noted above) and optimized diff performance. Nevertheless, if you have an extremely high snapshot count, monitor the OM for any memory or performance impact. Likewise, snapshot diff operations that produce extremely large outputs (e.g., millions of differences) may be resource-intensive to serve; they are paginated and cached to mitigate this.

Reviewer: Snapshot diff performance doesn't get directly impacted because of the number of snapshots as such. Only the number of concurrent snapshot diff operations will impact snapshot diff performance because of throttling mechanisms in place.

* **Open File Descriptors Limit:** It is recommended to raise the maximum number of open file descriptors (ulimit) for the Ozone Manager process. Each RocksDB instance (and each snapshot and diff job) can open many files. In production deployments, consider setting the per-process file descriptor limit to **at least 32,000**, and in many cases 64k or 128k is advisable. Ensure the Linux `nofile` ulimit is configured accordingly (via `/etc/security/limits.conf` or systemd service unit limits for ozone).
* **Use NVMe SSDs for Metadata:** Ozone Manager’s metadata (which includes the RocksDB key tables and snapshot info) should be placed on fast storage. It is highly recommended to use NVMe SSD drives for the OM metadata directories. Snapshots put additional I/O load on OM’s RocksDB (for maintaining multiple snapshot tables and for scanning during diffs). Fast disk (NVMe) improves OM throughput significantly. If NVMe is not available, use the fastest disks possible (SSD over HDD). Additionally, consider RAID1 or RAID10 for OM metadata for reliability, but prioritize random read/write performance.

> * **Memory and CPU for Ozone Manager:** Snapshots consume OM memory proportional to how many are being accessed concurrently. Each active SnapshotDiff job, for example, will load snapshot metadata into memory. By default, OM allows 10 concurrent diff jobs – if each diff is large, this can use considerable memory. Ensure the Ozone Manager is allocated sufficient heap. For a production cluster with snapshots, a larger heap (e.g., 16-32 GB or more) for OM may be warranted, depending on the number of keys and snapshots. Monitor GC and adjust the heap size as needed.

Reviewer: Diff size being large may not necessarily increase memory usage. Only in the case of FSO when there are a lot of directory objects it may lead to an increase in the memory usage and that also shouldn't be much. We compute snapshot diff by spliing intermediate results to the disk.

Ozone also provides a SnapshotDiff feature. When a user issues a SnapshotDiff between two snapshots, the OM efficiently computes all the differences (added, deleted, modified, or renamed keys) between the two snapshots and returns a paginated list of changes. Snapshot diff results are cached to speed up subsequent requests for the same snapshot pair.

## System Architecture Deep Dive

> Internally, Ozone implements snapshots by **versioning the OM metadata for each bucket** snapshot. The OM maintains a snapshot metadata table that records the state of the bucket’s key directory tree at the moment of snapshot creation. No data is physically copied at snapshot creation – the operation simply marks a consistent snapshot of the OM’s RocksDB state (hence snapshots are created instantaneously). Under the hood, Ozone relies on RocksDB’s abilities (like checkpoint) to preserve point-in-time views of the metadata. Each snapshot is identified by a unique ID and name, and each key entry in the OM DB carries information about which snapshots (if any) it belongs to. This approach ensures that **common data is not duplicated** across snapshots: if a key has not changed between two snapshots, both snapshots reference the same underlying data blocks.

Author: Currently we do not allow compaction on snapshots.

* **Reserved Namespace Name `.snapshot`:** The name `.snapshot` is reserved by Ozone. Users cannot create keys or directories with the exact name `.snapshot` at the root of a bucket (and similarly, `.snapshot` cannot be used as a volume or bucket name). This is because `.snapshot` is used as the special entry to access snapshots. For example, if a user tries to create a directory literally named `.snapshot` in a bucket, the system will prevent it or treat it as the snapshot namespace. This is analogous to HDFS where `.snapshot` is a reserved directory name in snapshottable directories. The reservation is case-sensitive (only `.snapshot` in all lowercase is reserved). As a best practice, avoid naming any key or folder in Ozone starting with “.snapshot” to prevent any ambiguity.

> * **Snapshot Performance and Scale:** Creating snapshots is instantaneous and cheap in Ozone; however, maintaining a very large number of snapshots (thousands per bucket) can increase the size of OM metadata and may slow down operations like listing snapshots. Snapshot diff performance, however, is not directly impacted by the number of snapshots; only the number of concurrent snapshot diff operations affects diff performance, due to throttling mechanisms in place. Recent improvements have raised the supported snapshot limit (default max 10k per OM as noted above) and optimized diff performance. Nevertheless, if you have an extremely high snapshot count, monitor the OM for any memory or performance impact. Likewise, snapshot diff operations that produce extremely large outputs (e.g., millions of differences) may be resource-intensive to serve; they are paginated and cached to mitigate this.

Author: updated.
